# Array, ArrayList and List in Java

## 1. Arrays

- Arrays are used to store multiple values in a single variable.
- Should be declared with a specific size (all elements should be of the same type).
- The size of an array is fixed and cannot be changed once it is created.
- The index of the first element in an array is 0.
- The index of the last element in an array is `length - 1`.
- They are contiguous blocks of memory. The elements are stored in consecutive memory locations. For example, if the first element is stored at memory location `1000`, the second element will be stored at `1004` (assuming each element takes 4 bytes). That's why arrays have a fixed size. If you want to add more elements, you need to create a new array with a larger size and copy the elements from the old array to the new array.

Syntax:

```java
// Declaration
int[] numbers = new int[5];

// Initialization
for (int i = 0; i < numbers.length; i++) {
    numbers[i] = (i + 1) * 10;
}

// Accessing elements
System.out.println(numbers[0]); // 10
System.out.println(numbers[1]); // 20
```

This line will throw an `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException` because the index is out of bounds:

```java
System.out.println(numbers[5]);
```

### Array Methods

- `length`: Returns the length of the array.
- `clone()`: Creates a shallow copy of the array.
- `equals()`: Compares two arrays for equality.
- `fill()`: Assigns the specified value to each element of the array.
- `sort()`: Sorts the array in ascending order.
- `binarySearch()`: Searches for the specified element in the array using a binary search algorithm.

```java
int[] numbers = {5, 3, 8, 2, 1};

// Length
System.out.println(numbers.length); // 5
System.out.println(Arrays.toString(numbers)); // [5, 3, 8, 2, 1]
System.out.println(Arrays.toString(numbers.clone())); // [5, 3, 8, 2, 1]
System.out.println(Arrays.equals(numbers, new int[]{5, 3, 8, 2, 1})); // true
System.out.println(Arrays.equals(numbers, new int[]{5, 3, 8, 2, 0})); // false
```

## 2. ArrayList

- An `ArrayList` is a resizable array that can grow or shrink in size dynamically.
- It is part of the `java.util` package.
- It is implemented using an array internally.

## 3. LinkedList

## 4. Java In-built Lists

## 5. Array vs. ArrayList vs. LinkedList

## 6. Arrays Class

## 7. Collections Class

## 8. Iterator

## 9. ListIterator

## 10. Comparable and Comparator

